JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
delivered a lengthy,
emotional speech as he unveiled
new steps
today to reduce gun violence.
Republicans quickly denounced
many of his
remarks, and others wondered
just how much
impact his changes could have in
a country
where Americans own an estimated
300 million
guns.
Victims' families hailed many of
the measures,
and the president argued that --
quote -- "We
maybe cannot save everybody, but
we could
save some."
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Fort Hood. Binghamton. Aurora.
Oak Creek.
Newtown. The Navy Yard. Santa
Barbara. Charleston.
San Bernardino. Too many.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With that litany
of mass shootings,
President Obama announced his
decision to
use executive action.
BARACK OBAMA: People are dying.
And the constant
excuses for inaction no longer
suffice.
That's why we're here today, not
to debate
the last mass shooting, but to
do something
to try to prevent the next one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The audience was
filled with
victims of gun violence,
including former
Arizona Congresswoman Gabby
Giffords, who
received a standing ovation when
she arrived.
Standing behind the president
were other survivors
and family members of people
killed by guns
over the past 20 years. They
included parents
of some of the 26 slain at Sandy
Hook Elementary
School in Newtown, Connecticut,
in 2012.
The president was moved to tears
over the
20 children who died there.
BARACK OBAMA: First-graders, and
from every
family who never imagined that
their loved
one would be taken from our
lives by a bullet
from a gun.
one would be taken from our
lives by a bullet
from a gun.
Every time I think about those
kids, it gets
me mad. And, by the way, it
happens on the
streets of Chicago every day.
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: After Newtown,
Mr. Obama tried
to get Congress to pass
comprehensive background
checks for gun buyers, but he
failed. Today,
he declared it can't end there.
BARACK OBAMA: So, the gun lobby
may be holding
Congress hostage right now, but
they cannot
hold America hostage.
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: We do not have to
accept this
carnage as the price of freedom.
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now he's using
presidential
powers for a limited effort to
expand private
gun sales subject to background
checks.
To do that, the government will
widen the
definition of gun dealers and
sellers to include
gun shows, Web sites and flea
markets. And
the FBI will hire 230 background
check processors
to help strengthen enforcement.
A recent Harvard study found
that up to 40
percent of guns purchased in the
U.S. don't
go through any background checks
at all.
Separately, Mr. Obama called
today for more
research into technologies to
keep guns safe.
BARACK OBAMA: If we can set it
up so you can't
unlock your phone unless you've
got the right
fingerprint, why can't we do the
same thing
for our guns?
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: If a child can't
open a bottle
of aspirin, we should make sure
that they
can't pull a trigger on a gun.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: Right?
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
presidential campaign
trail, Republican candidates
roundly rejected
President Obama's actions.
Ted Cruz was in Iowa.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
I can tell you right now those
executive orders
are not worth the paper they are
printed on,
because, when you live by the
pen, you die
by the pen, and my pen has got
an eraser.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Jeb Bush
spoke in New Hampshire.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: It's
not going to solve any problems
by having
the so-called gun show loophole
be taken -- taken
care of by executive order. The
president
doesn't have authority to do it.
If there
is an issue related to federal
gun laws, then
he ought to go to Congress and
try to forge
consensus to make it happen. He
doesn't have
this power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president had
anticipated
some of the reaction, insisting
he's within
his authority and that he's
upholding the
Second Amendment's right to bear
arms.
BARACK OBAMA: Contrary to the
claims of what
some gun rights proponents have
suggested,
this hasn't been the first step
in some slippery
slope to mass confiscation.
Contrary to claims
of some presidential candidates,
apparently,
before this meeting, this is not
a plot to
take away everybody's guns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still, the
president may need
additional funding from Congress
for mental
health care and extra FBI
workers, money the
Republican-controlled Congress
is unlikely
to approve.
Speaker of the House Paul Ryan
made that clear
today in a statement that said
-- quote -- "His
words and actions amount to a
form of intimidation
that undermines liberty."
Meanwhile, gun sales are
soaring. More guns
were sold in December, after the
attacks in
San Bernardino, California, than
almost any
month in the last 20 years.
Let's look at both the symbol
and substance
of what the president announced
today and
what its impact is likely to be.
John Feinblatt is the president
of Everytown
for Gun Safety, which was
created after the
Newtown shootings and supported
in part by
former New York City Mayor
Michael Bloomberg.
And David Kopel, he is research
director at
The Independence Institute. It's
a libertarian
think tank. And he's well --
also an adjunct
professor of constitutional law
at the University
of Denver.
And we welcome both of you.
John Feinblatt, is the president
on the right
track with these moves that he
says are going
to reduce the number of gun
deaths?
JOHN FEINBLATT, Everytown for
Gun Safety:
Yes, I think what the president
did today
was pretty straightforward.
What he did was took some
actions to enforce
laws already on the books. One
was, he clarified
the law, that, if you're in the
business of
selling guns, you need to get a
license and
do a background check.
And the second is, he said that
he was going
to devote the resources to
enforce it. And
I think that, when you combine
clarifying
the law with additional
enforcement resources,
what you're going to do is
interrupt some
commercial sellers who are
actually taking
advantage of loopholes in the
laws, not getting
a license, and selling without
background
checks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Kopel, do
you -- excuse
me for interrupting.
David Kopel, do you agree the
president is
generally on the right track
with this?
DAVID KOPEL, The Independence
Institute: Well,
I agree with most of what Mr.
Feinblatt just
said, because the president
didn't do anything
at all that changes the law.
He just very forcefully and
passionately restated
what has been the law since
1968, which is,
if you are engaged in the
business, as the
statute says, of selling
firearms, then you
have to have a federal firearms
license. And
of course he's correct that that
mandate is
the same whether you sell in
your basement
or at a gun store or on the
Internet or at
a gun show.
And it's always been like that.
So, he restated
it. He didn't change anything,
but I think
it's fine to remind people who
might not know
about that requirement that it
exists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John
Feinblatt, it's really
not that much of a change? It's
just a matter
of enforcing what was already
there?
JOHN FEINBLATT: Look, the law
has been blurry.
It's always -- the law has been,
if you're
engaged in the business of
selling guns, you
need to get a license and do
background checks.
But the problem was that there
was never any
meat on the bone. So, people
didn't know what